INF-419 Principles of Distributed Systems
Class Project 2026
Vasilis Samoladas
February 25, 2026
Abstract
Project Topic: Implementation of Map-Reduce on Kubernetes
Teams: of 3 people (I can accept teams of 2–4 if convinced).
Design due date: Sunday, March 22 2026, 23:59
Due date: Sunday, May 31 2026, 23:59
Deliverables: Design document, all source code, a presentation, validation results.
Presentation dates: The 21st and 22nd of May.
Extensions: no extension will be given .
1 Overview
You will develop a distributed system for performing parallel computation, along the lines of Map-
Reduce, as described in the paper
MapReduce: simplified data processing on large clusters
Authors: Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat
In: Proceedings of Symposium on Operating Systems Design & Implementation (OSDI’04)
Vol. 6, December 2004, Pages 10
Full paper: https://www.usenix.org/legacy/publications/library/proceedings/
osdi04/tech/full_papers/dean/dean.pdf
CACM version: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1327452.1327492
Note: you can also find the paper in e-class , in section “Lab (Εργαστήριο)”
1
1.1 System Concepts
User A human user who has the right to submit jobs.
Administrator A human user who has all rights to administer the sytem (create and delete users,
configure workers etc)
JobA parallel computation executed by your map-reduce system.
Input format Adata format , which can be read from a file, or many files, and converted into a
collection of key-value pairs, suitable for input to the mappers.
An input format can be customized for each job, but you are only required to implement one.
This can be, e.g., a JSON-based data format, or an AVRO-based data format.
Output format Adata format which can be generated from a collection of key-value pairs, generated
by the reducers, and written to a file (or to many files).
An output format can be customized for each job, but you are only required to implement one.
This can be, e.g., a JSON-based data format, or an AVRO-based data format.
Mapper A function that can serve as the mapper of a map-reduce job. This can be given as a stan-
dalone function, or as an object.
Reducer A function that can serve as the reducer of a map-reduce job. This can be given as a stan-
dalone function, or as an object.
Worker A node (container) that can execute the necessary computation (mappers, reducers, shuffle)
for completing a Job. Workers are able to execute code provided by each job.
Master A node (container) that can coordinate and monitor the proper execution of a job. Each
job has one master. Note that the master node is also typically a worker node, but this is not
required.
1.2 Requirements
1.User Authentication. The system will authenticate all users. New users shall be created by
the Authentication Service and will have a unique user name.
2.Single Sign-On. Each user must authenticate with a password, at the Authentication Service,
which will issue a user token once. Subsequently, all other services in the system will use this
token.
3.Job specification. Authenticated users may submit jobs, consisting of a pair of map/reduce
functions, and a filename . Job code (mapper and reducer) given to the system must be invokable
via a well-defined interface. Depending on the language of implementation, you may use java
class files, C/C++ source files, Python source files, etc. to provide code for a job.
2
4.Scalability. A job should be able to scale—in principle—to an arbitrary size, as determined by
the number of mappers and/or reducers it decomposes into. Also, the input, intermediate result
or output, should in principle be arbitrarily large.
5.User Interface. Users interact with the system via a User Interface (UI) service . The UI
service should be accessed through a Command-Line Interface (CLI), implementing at least
two commands:
•Ajobscommand, which can submit new jobs, and view the status of existing jobs, and
•aadmin command, which is used to administer the system (create and delete users, con-
figure nodes, etc).
Both of these commands can support sub-commands and options as needed.
It is possible that these commands be implemented as an API in a scripting language (e.g.
Python) and not as a CLI.
6.Kubernetes usage. To orchestrate your containers, you will use the kubernetes orchestrator.
You can install kubernetes locally using minikube .
7.Worker implementation. Workers execute mappers and reducers. Each worker should execute
in a kubernetes pod. The image of this container should be prepared by you. You should consider
worker pods to be generated by kubernetes Jobs.
Note: do not confuse a Map-Reduce job with a Kubernetes Job. The former is a
concept of your system, the second is just a tool you may—or may not—use.
8.Fault tolerance. Your system should support recovery on crash of workers or other pods ter-
minating unexpectedly, via command. This facility can be used to check the ability of your
implementation to recover after errors. The simplest way to implement such a facility is by
deleting the pod of the worker, via the kubernetes kubectl delete command.
2 First deliverable: Design document
In order to describe your implementation, you must deliver a Design document , where you will present
in detail:
•The choice of programming tools (language, coding agent, libraries, software components e.g.,
keycloak, mongodb, redis, postgresql, minio, etc that you will use).
•The microservices that will comprise your system, with an API for each.
•A description of the main Use Cases: submit data, submit code, run compute job, retrieve result,
etc. The description should contain UML interaction diagrams if multiple services are involved.
•A specification of how Map-reduce jobs are mapped to kubernetes entities (jobs/pods etc).
•The schema that you will use to store the state of your system.
3
3 Implementation
Each project team will consist of 4 members, and will implement their own set of services, following
the micro-service-based 3-layer architecture.
Figure 1: An overview of the services participating in the platform.
.
An overview of all services can be seen in Fig. 1. A brief description of the services is as follows:
User Interface Service: This service is responsible for providing access to the map-reduce functions,
via the two clients. It is replicated so that it can serve a high load of requests from clients.
This should be a stateless service. You can implement it in Kubernetes as a Deployment .
Authentication Service: it is responsible for maintaining the user authentication information and
other relevant personal info (e.g., user email), as well as the roles that each user has (plain user
or admin). This service maintains its own database, where it stores all user-related information.
An acceptable alternative is to use some existing software component. A good candidate for
implementing this service is Keycloak ( https://www.keycloak.org/ ), which you can easily
install in Kubernetes. Keycloak is a full-featured Identity Manager supporting OpenIDConnect
and OAuth2, and you will be more than adequately served if you choose it. On the other hand,
it does have a learning curve.
Alternatively, you may choose to roll up youe sleeves and implement your own authentication
service. If you go this way, it is not required this service to be especially sophisticated. A stan-
dalone deployment is sufficient for this service, or a StatefulService with a replicaCount
of 1. For the user database, a simple relational database can be utilized or you can re-use the
DDS.
Manager service: This is the main service of the whole system . It is an internal service that man-
ages and monitors the execution of jobs.
To be resilient, this is a replicated service, that should probably be implemented as a StatefulSet .
Each job is handled by one of the replica pods. If a replica fails, Kubernetes will replace the
4
failed pod and the information in DDS can be used to continue managing the jobs of the failed
replica.
When a new job is submitted to the system, the UI service selects one replica of the monitoring
service and passes it the relevant information so that the new job can be scheduled for execution.
You can use any balancing technique for this, for example a hashing scheme.
Distributed Data Service: This database service is used to provide consistent, reliable and fault-
tolerant data storage to the rest of the system. To implement this service, you should utilize
some existing Open Source component (e.g., postgresql, mongodb, etc). You do need to design
the information schema that will be stored on this service carefully.
Workers: These are the nodes where all execution happens. The system should (theoretically) scale
to thousands of these nodes. When a worker fails, the task that was assigned to this worker must
be re-assigned to another worker. You should probably implement these workers as Kubernetes
Jobs.
Shared File System: This is where input and output data can be stored. There are various options
for this store, such as:
•A shared PersistentVolume created using attribute ReadWriteMany (we will discuss
this in the lab).
•A storage service that you can set up independently, such as a (local) installation of MinIO
(https://min.io/ ) or other S3-based storage server (e.g, look at Garage https://
garagehq.deuxfleurs.fr/ ).
3.1 Implementation tools and Grading
Tools. You can build your project using any tools you want, including using ready-made components
to implement your microservices. Regarding programming languages, the best candidates for finding
help online, are probably Python or Java. Remember that ChatGPT is your friend in learning a new
API/library.
Vibe coding. It is an explitic goal of this course to familiarize you with vibe coding. For this purpose,
you are definitely encouraged to use the coding agent of your choice in order to implement the system.
Github collaboration. It is compulsory that you use a Github repository, that you share with
me.The checkins to this github repository should be frequent and demonstrate that you performed
the work in small pieces.
Github logs. The commit history of the project repository will be used to assess the contribution of
each player in the overall project. Although you are encouraged to collaborate, make sure that each
member of the team has a clear commit record showing that she/he contributed a significant share of
the total effort.
5
Grading. I EXPECT TO SEE A FEW COMMITS EVERY WEEK. COMMIT HISTORIES
THAT SHOW THE WORK TAKING PLACE IN THE LAST COUPLE OF WEEKS WILL
BE GRADED VERY POORLY.
4 Final deliverables: Code and validation report
You should be prepared to deliver:
1.Full source code of all parts of the system (including Makefiles, Dockerfiles, Ant/Maven files,
Kubernetes manifests etc).
Everything should be delivered via Github. Delivering by some other method is not ac-
ceptable.
Ideally, one should be able to install your system on Kubernetes by running a simple script (but
you may need to provide some assumptions on the container setup). Think
kubectl apply -f ...
2.A presentation (in Openoffice, Powerpoint or PDF) describing your implementation, including
(a)Tools, frameworks and libraries you used
(b)Choices that you made (e.g., how did you implement the web interface)
(c)Execution on 8 nodes or more (we will use the Okeanos services , details will follow) and
measure the performance of some indicative service calls under concurrency (use Apache
Bench for this).
(d)System recovery, when microservice pods are killed.
(e)Job completion, even after some mappers and/or reducers fail.
3.You should be prepared to present the above presentation on the last week of classes at the end
of the semester.
Validation programs. For validating your system, you should have at least 2 proper benchmark
datasets and mapper-reducer pairs.
You can get ideas, and even use and adapt as needed the material found in https://engineering.
purdue.edu/~puma/pumabenchmarks.htm
5 Advice
To properly implement your services and their functionality, you should use libraries and frameworks
for providing major services. If you have already used such software, it is acceptable to use them
for this project. However, a goal of this project for you should be to familiarize yourselves with new
software, so do not hesitate to try learning new things.
6
To implement some parts of the whole system, you will need knowledge that we will study later in
the course. So that you make continuous progress on the project, it is important to plan your coding
and studying work, on those parts that are covered first.
Here is a short list of advice.
•First, form a team (3 people per team), exchange emails and other contact information. Agree
on the tools to work with each other. This is extra important since you can start working without
meeting each other.
–A teleconferencing platform. Zoom is a good choice in this regard.
–A platform where you can message each other quickly (email can be hard to use some-
times). I use slack and can recommend it.
–A github project to exchange source code. If you are not on github , get on it now! Also,
make sure you know how to use git
•Start selecting the software that you will use to implement your project. I strongly recommend
one of the following “language ecosystem” choices:
–Java ecosystem (including scala or groovy if you know or want to learn them) is of course
an excellent choice. This is the preferred ecosystem for information systems around the
world, and learning it better is a task that you will not regret.
–Python is also an excellent choice (my personal favorite), and offers many excellent facil-
ities for implementing our project. Python has recently become the #1 language for data
analytics, machine learning and high-performance computing. You can’t go wrong with it.
–C++ is a good choice, if everyone in your team knows some C++. Otherwise, it may be a
bit difficult to manage.
Once you have selected the ecosystem, it is a good idea to also select a good build system for
your code and get familiar with it.
•Start playing with docker (highly recommended) or any other platform for deploying containers
(you are on your own!!). In particular, learn how to build a Docker image and how to push it to
docker hub. There is excellent documentation on the Docker website.
•Similarly, install and start playing with minikube . Write some simple manifests to deploy a
very minimal service, and use kubectl to work with your containers. Then, graduate to a
deployment, add a service and learn how to port-forward to your machine, in order to be able
to access the service.
•The next step is to design your implementation. Make sure you are fully aware of what the
service API of each of the middle tier services is. Use UML a lot to specify your design, and
then code your UML. If not, you will forget what your design is, and it will be hard to retrieve
it from source code.
7
•Add logging to your code from the start, and learn how to monitor your service’s execution,
when it runs inside the Kubernetes cluster.
Make sure that you write unit tests for every piece of code that you use. Unit testing is a very
useful habit that you need to acquire as programmers, and it is going to save you 50% of the
effort you will otherwise put in building your software.
A very important use of unit testing is to test tools that you test the libraries and tools that you
will use. Write small tests to use the tools the way you intend to use them in the code. These
tests will make you more confident that you have understood the use of these tools, and are a
great way to learn new APIs and libraries.
•Share the work. One of you should take charge for each new technology that you learn. For
example, one can be in charge of docker and deployment, another can be in charge of API
development. All of you should probably work on the middle tier services and the databases.
What one learns, she transfers to the other.
•Usee-class for forums, discussion etc, to ask questions that look too hard for ChatGPT.
Good luck, and remember:
KISS : Keep It Simple Stupid!
and
RTFM : Read The Fine Manual!
8